Climate change: southeast Asia's existential threat
According to the 6th Assessment Report (AR6) by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), human-induced climate change is affecting weather and climate extremes in every region, evidenced by the increasing number of adverse weather events around the globe in the past few years. There is no single inhabitable region of earth that has not been affected by climate change, but its impacts differ across regions. For Southeast Asia, the prediction is for more extreme cyclones, uneven increases in temperatures and rainfall, and attendant flooding and inundation in some parts of the mainland.1
Climate change is not an anticipated threat but a present and real crisis that has already been affecting Southeast Asia. Tropical cyclones, extreme rainfall, floods, loss of biodiversity, temperature increases and rising sea levels are happening with increasing frequency and high intensity. Some are slow-onset events that take place over extended periods of time (such as temperature increases, rising sea levels, and ocean acidification), while others are fast-onset events (such as tropical cyclones, extreme flooding, and landslides).
The prevailing advice from the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is to retire the names of tropical cyclones that were particularly deadly or costly.2 In the list of fifty-four tropical cyclone names that have been retired,3 twenty-four of them are associated with countries in Southeast Asia; namely, the Philippines and Vietnam. Names of super typhoons like Haiyan and Mangkhut, familiar to millions of residents in the region, are no longer in use because of the massive casualty numbers and extensive economic damage they have caused.
Southeast Asia suffers disproportionately from climate change. Disproportionality comes from two aspects. First is the region's disproportionate exposure to the number of climate disasters and extreme weather events. Southeast Asia is already predisposed to natural hazards, with high exposure to multiple geophysical hazards that are not related to climate change.4 It is prone to earthquakes and tsunamis, such as the 2004 Aceh-Andaman earthquake. It is also one of the most volcanically active regions. Climate change will compound these hazards. Three countries in Southeast Asia—Myanmar, the Philippines and Thailand—suffer the greatest long-term risks of climate change and, according to the Global Climate Risk Index 2021, were listed among the top ten most affected countries from 2000 to 2019.5 The burden on Southeast Asian countries to adapt to climate change is therefore exceptionally high.
Second is Southeast Asia's historically disproportionate share of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Historically, the region's share of GHG emissions has been low compared with the world's top ten emitters, which contribute over two-thirds of global emissions.6 Compared with China (26.1 per cent), the United States (12.67 per cent) and the European Union (7.52 per cent), Southeast Asia's share is only 5.6 per cent.7 That being said, its future share of emissions growth is expected to increase in tandem with population and economic growth in the coming decades. ASEAN's combined population is expected to increase from 667 million to 770 million by 2040, and it is projected to become the world's fourth-largest economy by 2030.8 According to the ASEAN Center for Energy, the region's energy-related GHG emissions are projected to increase by 34 per cent to 147 per cent between 2017 and 2040.9 Therefore, the mitigation burden on Southeast Asia will be high too.
Climate Change in Southeast Asia: Perceptions and Commitments
Southeast Asia's Perceptions of Climate Change
Climate change ranked among the region's top three security challenges in annual surveys of Southeast Asia in 2019 and 2020.10 When asked about their views of climate change, a majority said that it is a "serious and immediate threat" to their country's well-being, with respondents from the Philippines and Vietnam topping the rankings at 85.1 per cent and 70.9 per cent, respectively.11 These results were no surprise given that both countries suffered terribly from the effects of super typhoons Goni and Rolly in late 2020. Elevated concerns about climate change in the region continue to persist despite the threat of the COVID-19 pandemic. When asked in a climate survey whether governments in the region should prioritize COVID-19 or the climate emergency, 64.6 per cent of Southeast Asians responded that they want governments to pay attention to both crises despite the pandemic's immediate public health threat.12 Respondents in the same survey ranked floods (81.3 per cent), loss of biodiversity (60.2 per cent) and sea level rise (59.5 per cent) as the region's top three climate change impacts, showing that both fast- and slow-onset events were being felt.13
Across the region, the policies and actions of national governments have generally been rated poorly, with 46.1 per cent saying that their governments were aware of the threats but had failed to allocate sufficient resources to address them, while another 24.8 per cent said that governments were not giving attention to the problem. Countries that were deemed to have allocated sufficient resources to climate change were Singapore (41.8 per cent), Laos (28.6 per cent) and Cambodia (17.6 per cent), whereas the countries that were rated poorly in terms of the government paying attention to climate change were Thailand (45.7 per cent), Myanmar (44.4 per cent) and Malaysia (41.6 per cent).14
Southeast Asia's Climate Commitments
As of November 2021, all ten ASEAN member states have submitted their updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) as part of their obligations under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement. Article 4 calls for parties to submit plans to reduce emissions and adapt to climate impacts every five years in order to meet the stated goals of the agreement. These goals include ( 1) holding the global temperature increase to well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius, ( 2) increasing the ability to adapt to adverse impacts of climate change and fostering climate resilience, and ( 3) making finance flows consistent with a pathway towards low GHG emissions.15
The nature of NDCs is to allow parties to decide on their own targets "in light of different national circumstances".16 Developing countries that do not possess adequate capacity have set their national targets on receiving international assistance. Many NDCs are thus grouped into two categories: one is called "unconditional targets", meaning emission reduction targets that are based on a country's own capacity to reach them, while the other is termed "conditional targets", meaning targets based on receiving international assistance. Table 1 provides a summary of the 2015 intended NDCs of ASEAN member states (INDCs)17 and updated 2021 NDCs.
It is worth noting that Brunei, Malaysia and Singapore do not have conditional targets, whereas Cambodia has conditioned all of its climate targets fully on assistance—a reflection of the socio-economic developmental divide between
Click for larger view View full resolution
Table 1.
Summary of 2015 INDCs and 2021 Updated NDCs for ASEAN Member States
the ASEAN member states. Although every country has made commitments to reduce GHG emissions regardless of the conditionality, it is worth noting that each country's 2030 BAU (Business-As-Usual) scenario applies a different baseline: Malaysia and Singapore use 2005 as their baseline reference, whereas Indonesia uses 2010. Moreover, some countries apply economy-wide targets, while others apply sectoral targets; some adopt emissions intensity targets, while others aim to reduce their absolute emissions.18
Have ASEAN member states shown increased ambitions in their NDCs? Comparing the 2015 INDCs and the new 2020/21 NDCs, it is encouraging to note that Brunei, Cambodia and Laos have set their first economy-wide emissions targets, where previously they had only utilized sectoral targets. The Philippines and Vietnam increased their unconditional targets incrementally by 5 per cent and 2 per cent, respectively. Where Malaysia previously conditioned its target on receiving assistance it has now decided that it is able to achieve its 45 per cent reduction target on its own. Singapore has moved from an emissions intensity target to an absolute emissions target, which provides greater clarity and transparency, and it has also added a seventh GHG gas (nitrogen trifluoride). Overall, regional countries have shown an extremely modest increase in ambition, which remains insufficient to move the needle.
Long-term Low-Carbon Strategies
Parties to the Paris Agreement are expected to demonstrate an increase in ambition over time. They can do this by revising or tightening their targets upwards in each five-year NDC cycle or articulating their long-term low-carbon visions. Singapore (April 2020), Indonesia (July 2021), Thailand (October 2021) and Cambodia (December 2021) have submitted long-term low-emissions development strategies, as called for under Article 4.19 of the Paris Agreement that "All Parties should strive to formulate and communicate long-term low greenhouse gas emissions development strategies, mindful of Article 2 taking into account their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light of different national circumstances."
Long-term low-emissions development strategies (LT-LEDS) outline a country's long-term vision to transition to a low-carbon society. Singapore's target is to "halve emissions from its peak to 33 MtCO2e by 2050 and net zero emissions as soon as viable in the second half of the century".19 The reason given by Singapore for this is that as a disadvantaged country in terms of alternative energy (it has no wind, geothermal or nuclear capacity and only limited solar capacity) its low-carbon pathway is dependent on the availability of technology. Indonesia expects "to gain optimistically opportunity for more rapid progress towards net-zero emission in 2060 or sooner",20 whereas Thailand's ambition is to move "towards carbon neutrality by 2065".21 Cambodia envisions reaching carbon neutrality by 2050 by focusing on mitigation of its five key sectors of agriculture, forestry and other land uses; energy; transportation; industrial processes; and product use and waste.22
It is important to note here that "carbon neutrality" and "net-zero" are two different things. Carbon neutrality refers to not increasing carbon emissions and achieving reduction through carbon offsets, whereas net zero emissions mean taking actions to reduce actual carbon emissions to the lowest amount possible, using carbon offsets as a last resort.23 It is fair to say that the mid-century or later aspirational targets of these four countries will depend on whether a dramatic shift in consumption—for instance, abandoning coal for power generation in Indonesia—takes place. Other factors include whether the countries will be able to tap into public climate finance flows, attract private sector investments, receive international assistance, or in the case of Singapore, get access to feasible and viable technology to reduce its emissions.
The assessment of the current five-year NDCs of ASEAN member states is that they are unlikely to be achieved under the present policies.24 Experts estimate that the region needs to lower its emissions by 11 per cent relative to its current trajectory in order to meet its NDC goals.25 The International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that the region's current policies will lead to an increase of CO2 emissions that is seven times faster than the global average for the period between 2018 and 2040.26 Whether countries will be able to realize their LT-LEDS visions will depend on a number of factors, including political will, governance and the ability to balance present and future needs.
Managing Economic Growth and Rising Emissions
ASEAN's GHG emissions will continue rising27 because of a combination of population and economic growth. Estimates put ASEAN on track to become the world's fourth-largest economy, collectively, by 2030. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic that has lasted two years, Southeast Asia is expecting a rebound in 2022 of 5.1 per cent in its GDP growth, surpassing the ADB's 2020 forecast of 4.7 per cent.28
A study by the Swiss Re Institute projects that in the most severe scenario of a temperature increase of 3.2 degrees Celsius the GDP loss to the combined ASEAN member states will be 37.4 per cent. Conversely, for the scenario of an increase of well below 2 degrees Celsius, ASEAN member states stand to only sustain a loss of 0.8 per cent in GDP.29 But even in a best-case scenario of implementing "in full and on time" all the climate pledges made at the 26th United Nations Climate Change Conference in 2021 (COP26), the IEA projects that this will only be sufficient to hold temperature increase to 1.8 degree Celsius by 2100.30
Countries in this region are becoming increasingly cognizant that economic growth comes at a heavy cost to the environment, to health and to the climate. In order to grow sustainably over the next few decades, Southeast Asian countries need to embark on radical decarbonization pathways and shift from the current overreliance on fossil fuels—namely, coal—to cleaner, renewable sources of energy. But the trilemma of energy—security, equity and sustainability—continues to worry governments worldwide.31 Without an uninterrupted, accessible and affordable supply of energy, countries run the risk of uneven economic growth or even of derailing the socio-economic progress they have made. For developing countries that have yet to achieve their desired levels of economic progress, the absence of reliable and cheap energy sources means delaying the achievement of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, a set of global goals adopted in 2015 by the UN to end poverty, protect the environment and ensure peace and prosperity by 2030.
Addressing Southeast Asia's Energy Needs
Southeast Asia's main source of carbon emissions is power generation. The region's dominant source of energy comes from fossil fuels consisting mainly of oil, coal and gas.32 The combined share of fossil fuels is projected to increase from 78 per cent in 2017 to 81.7 per cent in 2050.33 Southeast Asian countries are aware of the need to diversify their sources of energy. This is evident in collective aspirational targets such as the 23 per cent renewable energy (RE) target in total primary energy supply by 2025, as articulated in the ASEAN Plan of Action for Energy Cooperation (2021–2025). But ASEAN will not reach its RE target if national energy policies remain unchanged. Without a shift in energy policies, RE is predicted to only make up 13 per cent of ASEAN's total primary energy supply by 2040.34
While oil dominates Southeast Asia as its primary fossil fuel, coal is projected to overtake oil as the top consumption fuel by 2030.35 Coal is the dirtiest of fossil fuels, causing direct emissions that are harmful to both the environment and health. Coal easily outstrips oil in terms of emissions on a per capita CO2 emissions basis.36 Governments have not been able to wean their countries from a reliance on coal because of its abundance, affordability, reliability and portability. Although Southeast Asia has seen a 63 per cent decrease in new coal pipelines since 2015 according to a report in 2021 by the Third Generation Environmentalism (E3G) think tank,37 it remains one of the regions where coal-fired power generation has been expanding, mainly in Indonesia, Vietnam and the Philippines.38 The same E3G report singled out Vietnam and Indonesia among six countries (together with China, India, Turkey and Bangladesh) that account for four-fifths of the world's coal pipeline. Indonesia, which accounted for 4 per cent of the global coal pipeline in 2015, has announced plans to halt new coal-fired power plants after 2023. This is aligned with Indonesia's 2060 net zero commitment. Vietnam, on the other hand, holds the third-largest pre-construction pipeline in the world. Vietnam's draft 8th Power Development Plan states that there will be no new coal-fired power plants, beyond those already under construction or planned for completion, by 2025.39
A decrease in new coal pipelines must be met in tandem with a ramp-up in alternative sources of energy in order to meet present and future energy needs. A precipitous energy shortfall can be avoided with the appropriate long-term strategic planning. Some ASEAN countries have started to diversify into hydropower and solar and wind energy. The Mekong Delta countries possess hydropower in abundance. Since 2010, hydropower has become the renewable energy of choice leading to an oversupply that allows Laos, for instance, to become a net exporter of hydropower energy. Similarly, Vietnam has the highest installed capacity for solar energy in Southeast Asia, followed by Thailand, the Philippines and Malaysia.40 Singapore, too, has identified solar energy as its most promising renewable energy source and aims to increase capacity.41 Despite its physical limitations, the city state has managed to install one of the world's largest floating solar farms, which delivers approximately six million kilowatt hours of energy per year.42 For the Southeast Asian countries where electrification of rural areas is a challenge, solar power has proven effective in improving electricity access, and this helps to unlock growth. The region's RE share has been increasing, but this will not be sufficient if countries aim to meet the NDC targets. It is estimated that in order to increase the share of clean energy in ASEAN the required investment for renewable energy ranges from US$511 billion in an alternative policy scenario (meaning governments change their current policies) to US$540 billion in a business-as-usual scenario.43
The current global energy crunch that started in late 2021 is proving challenging for many countries who not only depend on fossil fuels for electricity generation but on imported fossil fuels. According to the IEA's January 2022 Electricity Market Report, global electricity demand grew by more than 6 per cent, the world's largest since its recovery from the 2010 global financial crisis, with coal making up more than half of the increase in demand.44 As a consequence, CO2 emissions from electricity generation rose by nearly 7 per cent in 2021.45 About half of the global growth in electricity demand came from China, which consequently saw a ramp-up in coal production domestically and an increased demand for coal imports. Because of its bilateral trade row with Australia, China turned to Indonesia to fulfil its coal imports.46 This in turn had a downstream effect that led to Indonesia issuing a temporary one-month ban on coal exports in order to secure its own energy security as it faced the prospects of domestic shortages.47 Indonesia has since partially eased the ban because of external pressures from Japan, South Korea and the Philippines.48 The IEA has attributed the energy crisis to a combination of factors such as stronger than expected economic growth and greater extreme weather conditions (e.g. a colder winter than usual).49 The confluence of these factors, together with the supply chain pressures that were felt globally late last year, has driven energy prices to record highs and now threatens to keep inflation fears elevated.
The 2021 energy crisis may be unprecedented but it presents an opportunity for governments to reform conventional energy policies, particularly for those countries dependent on imported fossil fuels for electricity generation. Clean power costs are fixed once the project is developed. The move towards a clean energy transition may finally make sense if energy operators could consider the clinical cost-benefit analysis of upfront capital investments—for instance, lease of land, purchase of solar panels, connection to grid, infrastructure building and storage capacity—vis-à-vis the volatility of fuel prices and other variables such as supply chain disruptions or sudden political ruptures (as was the case in the 1980s oil crisis sparked by the Iran-Iraq War).
Is it possible for Southeast Asia to achieve a sustainable fully electrified power structure with efficient power grids coupled with bilateral and regional power sharing arrangements? An orderly systematic energy transition away from fossil fuel imports requires a step-by-step approach. Putting aside the current short-term energy needs, individual countries need to make massive transformational shifts in energy plans and policies by aligning with NDC and LT-LED targets. In the short-term, policymakers need to consider appropriate abatement strategies to reduce carbon emissions from existing power plants, retire aging coal-fired power plants, harmonize the ASEAN Power Grid and improve regional energy connectivity. In the medium-term, governments need to rationalize the reduction subsidies for fossil fuels and provide incentives for the purchase of clean energy. In 2015 fossil fuel subsidies made up 11 per cent of Indonesia's GDP, and by 2018 Indonesia was the world's fifth-largest fossil fuel subsidizer. Cumulatively, ASEAN's total fuel consumption subsidies between 2010 and 2018 amounted to over US$322 billion.50 In the long-term, it is the tricky problem of diversifying away from fossil fuels that will preoccupy governments in the region. Second, countries need to build an enabling environment by establishing a good legal regulatory framework to attract long-term climate-friendly investments. Third, countries need to craft a road map for labour transition to upskill and reskill the energy sector workforce for it to adapt to the clean energy transformation.
Southeast Asia's Adaptation Needs
Southeast Asia's extensive adaptation needs are directly correlated to the region's high exposure to climate change. But climate adaptation needs vary from country to country. The ASEAN Risk Monitor and Disaster Management Review (ARMOR) by the ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance Centre measures each member state's disaster risk, including its multi-hazard exposure, vulnerability and coping capacity. The 2020 report found that the Philippines, Indonesia and Myanmar had the highest multi-hazard exposure (which includes both climate-related and geological hazards), while Singapore ranked the lowest.51 Vietnam's risk exposure to floods is the highest in the region. In terms of vulnerability, Myanmar, the Philippines and Laos ranked the highest on the index because they possess only limited resources to prepare for, respond to and recover from disasters.52 In terms of coping capacity, Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos were ranked the lowest, whereas Singapore, Brunei and Malaysia ranked the highest because of their robust governance, economic and infrastructural capacities.53
Adaptation actions take place at various levels—international, regional, national, provincial and local community. Hence, there is no one-size-fits-all adaptation solution. Adaptation is also seen as a cost centre by governments, private corporations and businesses. To take a narrow view of adaptation, there is simply no return on investments. But in order to survive, protect and climate-proof their assets and people, governments, businesses and companies need to strengthen adaptive capacities and increase local climate resilience by mainstreaming climate risks in planning in order to minimize loss and damage. Climate adaptation is a multi-stakeholder, multi-sectoral activity that cannot rely on one entity or one group of entities.
ASEAN's adaptation responses have been highly fragmented and diverse. Diverse institutional arrangements for both climate action and disaster management exist, but there is an absence of a common platform to address intersections of climate and disaster risk governance at the local, national and regional levels. For instance, although an ASEAN regional action plan for drought adaptation 2021–25 is in place, a similar plan for flood management is absent. Much of the work committed towards adaptation is based on availability of assistance from partners (such as support from the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific [UNESCAP] for the ASEAN drought adaptation plan), which makes it hard to maintain continuity.
The scale and speed of climate change adaptation in the region needs to be accelerated. The 2021 ASEAN State of the Climate Report has identified several bottlenecks that need to be overcome to achieve greater adaptation progress, including the quality of data, information-sharing, the quality of climate projections, the technical ability to scale down projections to the local level, the ability to conduct impacts assessments, the need for clearer adaptation goal setting, finance, reskilling of the workforce, and the absence of a regional climate adaptation fund. None of these are insurmountable on their own.
Conclusion: Changes on the Horizon
Although COP26 has been criticized for its lack of progress, one of the key deliverables was the finalization of Article 6 of the Paris Agreement after six years of intense negotiations that set out the rules for an international carbon market. This was done under the joint ministerial facilitation of informal consultations by Singapore and Norway. Having clarity on these rules is important because the majority of parties to the Paris Agreement have indicated they intend to use market mechanisms to achieve their mitigation targets.54 Additionally, carbon markets may be able to provide fair incentives for carbon-sink countries like Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand to be more ambitious in their green transformation. And almost all the ASEAN member states have indicated a desire to utilize some form of carbon market mechanisms in their NDCs. At least five ASEAN member states have some form of carbon pricing scheme in place. Singapore was the first country to establish a carbon tax in 2019. Thailand has its carbon crediting, carbon offset, and cap and trade scheme in place. Indonesia is planning to roll out an Emissions Trading Scheme by 2024. Hence, finalizing the rules on how to govern market and non-market mechanisms in trading carbon offsets and credits will benefit countries provided that climate and environmental integrity is maintained—a point that climate activists will monitor carefully to ensure there is no greenwashing.
Another development of importance in the region has been the release of Version 1 of the ASEAN Taxonomy on Sustainable Finance at COP26. The ASEAN Taxonomy, which provides a conceptual framework to guide financial investments and economic activities in the region, was the initiative of the ASEAN finance ministers and central banks.55 It was politically inconceivable that the financial systems of ASEAN member countries—which include advanced, middle-income and emerging economies, each with varying levels of socio-economic progress and different financial rules and policies—could agree on a standard classification for sustainable finance. The significance of the taxonomy lies in its ability to unite regulators, financial institutions, insurers, businesses and consumers with a common language that can cut across jurisdictions. It sets common standards that are harmonized and it ensures that private and public finance flows are directed towards sustainable infrastructure and investments and away from environmentally harmful activities. Since finance is a key enabler of structural transformation and transition, these standards make it easier for investors, companies, governments and regulators to make long-term transition decisions towards a low-carbon future.
As a concluding note, doing nothing is not an option for countries in this region who are already taking front-row seats in the climate catastrophe theatre. It is up to the countries individually and collectively to decide on the best course of action and to convince their partners to work with them to mitigate and adapt. The twin crises of the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change are opportunities that Southeast Asian countries should not miss in order to embark on a green recovery that is sustainable and just and which will benefit their populations.
